Foreword5%%%%%%%%
A long time ago (on the 11 th of November in 2003, Tuesday, 3:55:57 UTC), I received an
e-mail with the following message:
“I should say in a simple word that with the UVa Site, you have given birth to
a new CIVILIZATION and with the books you write (he meant “Programming
Challenges: The Programming Contest Training Manual” [60], coauthored with
Steven Skiena), you inspire the soldiers to carry on marching. May you live long
to serve the humanity by producing super-human programmers.”
Although that was clearly an exaggeration, it did cause me to think. I had a dream: to
create a community around the project I had started as a part of my teaching job at UVa,
with people from all around the world working together towards the same ideal. With a
little searching, I quickly found a whole online community running a web-ring of sites with
excellent tools that cover and provide whatever the UVa site lacked.
To me, ‘Methods to Solve’ by Steven Halim, a very young student from Indonesia, was
one of the more impressive websites. I was inspired to believe that the dream would become
real one day, because in this website lay the result of the hard work of a genius of algorithms
and informatics. Moreover, his declared objectives matched the core of my dream: to serve
humanity. Even better, he has a brother with similar interests and capabilities, Felix Halim.
It’s a pity that it takes so much time to start a real collaboration, but life is like that.
Fortunately, all of us have continued working together in a parallel fashion towards the
realization of that dream—the book that you have in your hands now is proof of that.
I can’t imagine a better complement for the UVa Online Judge. This book uses lots of
examples from UVa carefully selected and categorized both by problem type and solving
technique, providing incredibly useful help for the users of the site. By mastering and
practicing most programming exercises in this book, a reader can easily solve at least 500
problems in the UVa Online Judge, which will place them in the top 400-500 amongst
≈100000 UVa OJ users.
It’s clear that the book “Competitive Programming: Increasing the Lower Bound of
Programming Contests” is suitable for programmers who want to improve their ranks in
upcoming ICPC regionals and IOIs. The two authors have gone through these contests
(ICPC and IOI) themselves as contestants and now as coaches. But it’s also an essential
colleague for newcomers—as Steven and Felix say in the introduction ‘the book is not meant
to be read once, but several times’.
Moreover, it contains practical C++ source code to implement given algorithms. Un-
derstanding a problem is one thing, but knowing the algorithm to solve it is another, and
implementing the solution well in short and efficient code is tricky. After you have read this
extraordinary book three times you will realize that you are a much better programmer and,
more importantly, a happier person.